{\rtf1\ansi\deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0 Times New Roman;}}TrustShield AI - Phishing Detection Frameworkbody \{\par font-family: 'Segoe UI', 'Inter', 'Source Sans 3', 'Helvetica Neue', sans-serif;\par font-size: 16px;\par line-height: 1.65;\par color: #333;\par max-width: 800px;\par margin: 0 auto;\par padding: 20px;\par background: white;\par \}\par h1 \{\par font-size: 32px;\par font-weight: bold;\par color: #2563eb;\par margin-bottom: 20px;\par border-bottom: 2px solid #2563eb;\par padding-bottom: 16px;\par \}\par h2 \{\par font-size: 24px;\par font-weight: 600;\par color: #333;\par margin-top: 48px;\par margin-bottom: 24px;\par border-bottom: 1px solid #e5e7eb;\par padding-bottom: 12px;\par \}\par h3 \{\par font-size: 20px;\par font-weight: 600;\par color: #333;\par margin-top: 40px;\par margin-bottom: 16px;\par \}\par h4 \{\par font-size: 18px;\par font-weight: 600;\par color: #333;\par margin-top: 32px;\par margin-bottom: 12px;\par \}\par p \{\par margin-bottom: 16px;\par line-height: 1.8;\par \}\par strong \{\par color: #2563eb;\par font-weight: 600;\par \}\par code \{\par background: #f3f4f6;\par padding: 2px 4px;\par border-radius: 4px;\par font-family: 'Courier New', monospace;\par font-size: 14px;\par \}\par pre \{\par background: #1e1e1e;\par color: #00ffcc;\par padding: 16px;\par border-radius: 8px;\par overflow-x: auto;\par font-family: 'Courier New', monospace;\par font-size: 14px;\par margin: 20px 0;\par \}\par table \{\par width: 100%;\par border-collapse: collapse;\par margin: 24px 0;\par background: white;\par border-radius: 8px;\par overflow: hidden;\par box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0,0,0,0.1);\par \}\par th, td \{\par border: 1px solid #e5e7eb;\par padding: 12px 16px;\par text-align: left;\par \}\par th \{\par background: linear-gradient(135deg, #2563eb 0%, #3b82f6 100%);\par color: white;\par font-weight: 600;\par font-size: 14px;\par \}\par tr:nth-child(even) td \{\par background: #f9fafb;\par \}\par ul, ol \{\par margin-bottom: 16px;\par padding-left: 28px;\par \}\par li \{\par margin-bottom: 8px;\par line-height: 1.7;\par \}\par blockquote \{\par border-left: 4px solid #2563eb;\par padding-left: 16px;\par margin: 20px 0;\par font-style: italic;\par background: #f0f9ff;\par padding: 16px;\par border-radius: 0 8px 8px 0;\par \}\par .section-card \{\par background: white;\par border: 1px solid #e5e7eb;\par border-radius: 8px;\par padding: 24px;\par margin: 24px 0;\par box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0,0,0,0.1);\par \}\par .highlight-box \{\par background: linear-gradient(135deg, rgba(37, 99, 235, 0.1) 0%, rgba(37, 99, 235, 0.05) 100%);\par border-left: 5px solid #2563eb;\par padding: 24px;\par margin: 24px 0;\par border-radius: 8px;\par \}\par figure \{\par margin: 24px 0;\par text-align: center;\par \}\par figcaption \{\par font-size: 14px;\par color: #6b7280;\par margin-top: 8px;\par font-style: italic;\par \}\par @media print \{\par body \{ margin: 0; padding: 10px; \}\par .section-card \{ break-inside: avoid; \}\par h2, h3, h4 \{ break-after: avoid; \}\par table \{ break-inside: avoid; \}\par \}TrustShield AI: Hybrid ML-Based Phishing Detection using Flask, scikit-learn & MongoDBAbstractTrustShield AI\par is a multi-layered, AI-driven phishing detection framework designed to identify and mitigate sophisticated email-based attacks in real time. Built on a three-tier architecture comprising a frontend dashboard, a Flask-based asynchronous backend, and a MongoDB persistence layer, the system fuses six independent intelligence signals — machine learning prediction, URL intelligence, rule heuristics, emotional analysis, behavioural anomalies and attachment inspection — into a single sub-second verdict. Verdicts are accompanied by natural-language explanations generated by a locally hosted large language model (LLM).The system continuously stores every analyzed email, along with its classification metadata, in a live\par retraining corpus\par that is later used to update the active model. This ensures that the detection engine adapts to new phishing techniques and evolving attack patterns over time. TrustShield AI integrates with email clients through a Chrome Manifest V3 browser extension and with security operations teams through a real-time SOC dashboard.1. OverviewPhishing remains one of the most pervasive and damaging vectors in modern cybersecurity. Traditional rule-based spam filters rely on static keyword lists and sender blocklists, which attackers routinely defeat through paraphrasing, typosquatting, and personalised spear-phishing campaigns. TrustShield AI was designed to address this gap by combining classical machine learning, rule heuristics, and language-model reasoning in a single low-latency pipeline."TrustShield does not replace human judgement — it protects the human inside the loop, reducing cognitive load on the people most often targeted by phishing campaigns."The framework is intentionally lightweight. It runs on commodity hardware, uses an asynchronous Flask backend for non-blocking inference, and depends only on open-source libraries. Every architectural decision is biased toward\par observability\par ,\par explainability\par , and\par continuous learning\par .2. Background and motivationConventional email security deployments compute threat levels from static rule-sets that perform minimal processing on inbound mail. As a result, large volumes of malicious messages still reach end-users. Three structural problems motivated the design of TrustShield AI:Exposure window.\par When a phishing campaign slips past static filters, the user becomes the last line of defence — a position humans are consistently poor at occupying.Rigidity of hardcoded rules.\par Trigger-word filters cannot keep pace with adversarial paraphrasing or LLM-generated phishing content.Latency budget.\par Robust analysis must not delay mail delivery. Any practical solution has only a few hundred milliseconds per message.TrustShield's response is the\par TrustShield Orchestrator (TSO)\par — a horizontally cooperating set of intelligence modules rather than a monolithic classifier. The orchestrator coordinates analysis across three architectural tiers and six analytic layers, returning a unified verdict that is both quantitative (a trust score) and qualitative (a natural-language explanation).3. System architecture3.1 Three-tier designTrustShield AI is structured into three logical tiers. This separation allows each tier to scale, fail and be replaced independently of the others.TierTechnologyPurposePresentationSOC dashboard · Chrome extensionSurfaces verdicts, alerts and live telemetry to the user.ApplicationFlask API · asyncio executor · Detection engine · LLM gatewayPerforms analysis, fusion scoring and explanation generation.DataMongoDB · Model registry · Retrain corpusPersists scans, model artifacts and the living dataset.4. Technology stackThe project is implemented entirely in open-source technologies. The table below enumerates each architectural layer, the technology used, and its purpose within the system.LayerTechnologyPurposeFrontendHTML5, CSS3, JavaScript (Vanilla)Dashboard UI, real-time updatesBackendFlask (Python), asyncioREST API, async processingDatabaseMongoDBEmail storage, model artifactsML Frameworkscikit-learnClassification modelsLLMOllama (phi model)Natural language explanationsBrowser ExtensionChrome Manifest V3Client-side integrationTable 1.\par Engineering stack of TrustShield AI.5. Detection engineThe detection engine is the analytic core of TrustShield AI. Each incoming email is normalised, vectorised and dispatched to a non-blocking executor that runs ML inference alongside five rule-driven intelligence modules. The layers do not wait on each other — the pipeline keeps moving even as the LLM generates a human-readable explanation in the background.5.1 Aggressive fusionTrustShield uses a strategy referred to internally as\par aggressive fusion\par . Every layer returns a numeric score in\par [0, 1]\par . A weighted base score is computed across all layers, then multiplied by a contextual\par risk multiplier\par when the message touches financial keywords, account-state language or high emotional intensity. A trust score below the critical threshold flips the verdict to\par phishing · critical risk\par .5.2 Scoring layersThe six intelligence layers and their default fusion weights are as follows.LayerSignal TypeWeightDescriptionML ClassifierMachine learning prediction0.35scikit-learn text classificationURL IntelligenceHeuristic URL analysis0.20Domain reputation, TLD riskRule HeuristicsPattern matching0.15Keyword, sender analysisEmotional AnalysisSentiment detection0.10Urgency, fear indicatorsBehaviouralAnomaly detection0.10Unusual patternsAttachmentFile analysis0.10Executable detectionTable 2.\par Default weights of the aggressive fusion algorithm. Weights are configurable per deployment.6. SOC dashboardThe Security Operations Centre (SOC) dashboard is a web-based interface that allows security analysts to monitor the live behaviour of TrustShield AI. It is implemented in HTML, CSS and Vanilla JavaScript, and consumes the same Flask API as the browser extension.The dashboard surfaces four primary views:Live activity feed.\par Every scan and every verdict, streamed in real time.Risk levels and trends.\par Hourly and daily phishing pressure, segmented per tenant.Model information.\par Active model version, accuracy, calibration and drift indicators.Alerts and notifications.\par High-risk verdicts, drift alarms and pipeline failures, wired to operations channels.7. Browser extensionThe TrustShield browser extension is implemented as a Chrome\par Manifest V3\par extension. It reads the email body and embedded URLs the instant a message is opened inside Gmail or Outlook, posts the payload to the\par /analyze\par endpoint over HTTPS, and renders the verdict inline within the email client.The extension performs four steps for each opened message:Reads the email content and extracts URLs from the active DOM.Sends the payload to the Flask\par /analyze\par endpoint with a rotating API key.Displays the risk score, classification and triggered rules to the user.Mirrors the verdict to the SOC dashboard via the same logging spine.8. Living retraining datasetA central design principle of TrustShield AI is that the model must\par learn from the traffic it sees\par . The system does not rely solely on static phishing corpora. Every email processed through either the dashboard or the browser extension is persisted to MongoDB, along with its classification result, confidence score, risk level, source and timestamp.During retraining, the system retrieves this stored email data from the database and uses it to update the active machine learning model. This allows the model to adapt to\par new phishing techniques and evolving attack patterns\par over time. The dataset is therefore a\par living\par , continuously growing record of real-world email behaviour.Dataset schemaFieldTypeDescriptionemail_contentStringThe full text of the analyzed email.labelEnumClassification:\par phishing\par or\par legitimate\par .confidence_scoreFloat [0,1]Model probability for the predicted class.risk_levelEnumBucketed severity: low · medium · high · critical.sourceEnumOrigin of the analysis:\par dashboard\par or\par extension\par .timestampISODateTime of analysis (UTC).Table 3.\par Schema of the TrustShield retraining corpus stored in MongoDB.This continuous-learning loop ensures that the model remains\par adaptive, up-to-date and effective\par against contemporary phishing campaigns, without requiring manual curation of new training data.9. Performance evaluationTrustShield AI was evaluated under three representative threat scenarios. The results below were obtained on a workstation with 16 GB RAM running a single Flask worker against a MongoDB instance on the same host.ScenarioDetection rateAvg. latencyNotesStandard spam≈ 98%< 150 msA cohesive filtering block formed across the corpus — almost zero leakage.Spear-phishing≈ 95%< 200 msManipulated domains and bespoke pretexts — fusion held the line.Burst phishing≥ 90%< 220 msHigh-volume rapid-fire campaigns — the asynchronous pipeline absorbed the wave.Table 4.\par Detection rates and latencies measured across three threat scenarios.10. Future workSeveral directions are currently being explored to extend the framework:Transformer-based comprehension\par — semantic understanding of intent rather than purely lexical features.Live threat-intelligence APIs\par — globally sourced telemetry as a persistent additional defence layer.Edge inference\par — execution of the model inside the extension itself, eliminating the network round-trip.Autonomous remediation\par — automatic quarantine and sender disposal triggered before the user ever sees the message.11. See alsoPhishingEmail filteringMachine learningSecurity information and event management (SIEM)Large language model12. ReferencesKarthikeya et al.\par TrustShield AI: a multi-layer phishing detection framework.\par Engineering Journal, Issue 04, 2026.Pedregosa, F. et al.\par Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.\par JMLR 12, 2011.Grinberg, M.\par Flask Web Development.\par O'Reilly, 2018.Chodorow, K.\par MongoDB: The Definitive Guide.\par O'Reilly, 2019.Google.\par Chrome Extensions: Manifest V3 documentation.\par 2024.Ollama Project.\par phi model card.\par 2024.This blog was last edited on 26 April 2026, by\par Karthikeya\par .\par Text is available under the open documentation license; the source code is published on\par github.com/Tejus468/pfsd_project\par .TrustShield Blog · Engineering Journal · 2026Written by Karthikeya · Issue 04}